# Contributing

<!-- TOC -->

- [Installation and Development](#install)
    - [Running Tests](#tests)
    - [Logging](#logging)
- [Dependencies](#dependencies)
- [Coding Style](#codestyle)
- [PR Submission](#pr)
- [Documentation](#documentation)
    - [Building Documentation](#builddocs)
    - [Autogenerated Documentation](#autodocs)
    - [Custom Documentation](#customdocs)
- [Development Status](#status)


## Installation and Development<a name="install"></a>
Clone from github:
```bash
git clone git@github.com:CitrineInformatics/citrine-python
```

Create a virtual environment using Python >= 3.6.
One option is to use conda, but it is not required.

```bash
conda create -n <environment_name> python=3.7
conda activate <environment_name>
```

Then install requirements.

```bash
pip install -U -r requirements.txt
pip install -U -r test_requirements.txt
pip install --no-deps -e .
```

Note that if you use `python setup.py install` it will **not** install the libraries in "test_requirements.txt".
Although not necessary for *using* citrine-python, these libraries are important for development.

If using a conda environment, you can now launch a Jupyter notebook from the environment with `jupyter notebook`.
The resulting notebook will have access to the citrine-python library and all its dependencies.

Changes to citrine-python must pass all tests, follow style guidelines, and maintain 100% test coverage.
We use flake8 as a linter.
To run the linter on the "src/" directory:
```bash
flake8 src
```

### Running tests<a name="tests"></a>

We use pytest to run tests and use the associated library pytest-cov to check coverage.
See the [PyTest documentation](https://docs.pytest.org/en/latest/usage.html) for more information.

#### Command line

To run all tests and output a report of the coverage of the "src/" directory:
```bash
pytest tests/ --cov=src/
```

It is not uncommon to have path issues when running pytest from the command line.
Ensure that your $PATH variable contains the directory with the citrine-python repo.

#### Docker

Running tests in Docker will ensure the same development environment as used by Travis CI, our continuous integration server.
See the file .travis.yml in the repository root for more information.

To build the container, run this command from the repository root.
It will tag the image as "citrine-python":
```bash
docker build -f scripts/Dockerfile.pytest -t citrine-python .
```

To get an interactive bash shell in the Docker container, overriding the default entrypoint, run the following:
```bash
docker run --rm -it --entrypoint bash citrine-python
```

To run all unit tests in the Docker container with default parameters:
```bash
docker run --rm -it citrine-python
```

To run all tests in a module or run a specific test, run a command like the following (note that this will result in a reported test coverage that is low):
```bash
docker run --rm -it citrine-python tests/serialization/test_table.py
docker run --rm -it citrine-python tests/serialization/test_table.py::test_simple_deserialization
```

### Logging<a name="logging"></a>

A number of our Python modules use Python's built-in `logging` module, which supports several log
levels:

* `FATAL` - indicates a very serious (probably irrecoverable) failure has occurred
* `ERROR` - indicates an error, which by default will not be handled has occurred
* `WARNING` - indicates that something unusual is happening, often precedes failures
* `INFO` - informational output unrelated to problems
* `DEBUG` - verbose information output that may assist the developer while debugging
* `NOTSET` - currently unused in Citrine code, typically *extremely* verbose output describing
  the details of every operation being performed

As set, a logging level will return any logs at the set level and above, e.g., `WARNING` includes
itself, `ERROR`, and `FATAL`. By default, the log level is set to `WARNING`. However, it may be
preferable to set the log level to `ERROR` if your program's output should be particularly concise
and/or only produce actionable information. When debugging issues, increasing the verbosity to `DEBUG`
may be helpful, particularly if seeking assistance from the Citrine team.

To set your log level, add
```python
import logging
logging.root.setLevel(level=logging.DEBUG)
```
with the desired log level to your script.

#### Fine-grained log level control

In some scenarios, you may wish to increase or decrease the verbosity of a particular logger. For
instance

```python
from gemd.entity.dict_serializable import logger
import logging
logger.setLevel(logging.ERROR)
```
will silence warnings about receiving superfluous data in responses from Citrine APIs, while still
allowing other loggers to produce output of `WARNING` level and lower.

Another example:

```python
from citrine._session import logger
import logging
logger.setLevel(logging.DEBUG)
```
will enable `DEBUG` level output in the for all activity relating to HTTP requests to Citrine APIs.

In general, all log output originating from Citrine source code will include the module from which log output originates. 
By convention loggers are named `logger`, so importing `logger` from the originating module will locate the correct instance.
The log line

```
INFO:citrine._session:200 GET /projects/fc568490-224a-4070-807f-1427c4f4dcd8
```
is an example of output from the logger in the previous example.


## Dependencies<a name="dependencies"></a>
Dependencies are tracked in multiple places:
* requirements files (requirements.txt and test_requirements.txt)
* setup.py

The setup.py file only contains libraries that are necessary for users to run citrine-python.
If you add a dependency that is necessary to run the repo, it is crucial that you add it to setup.py.

The requirements files *additionally* contain dependencies for testing/development.
Please keep it up to date whenever you add or change dependencies.

## Coding Style<a name="codestyle"></a>
The citrine-python library follows [PEP8](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0008/), with the following exceptions:
* Maximum line length is 99 characters for code and 119 characters for docstrings
* Several docstring rules are relaxed (see tox.ini for a list of the ignored rules)

Type hints are strongly encouraged.

Positional arguments are strongly discouraged for methods with multiple arguments.
Keywords should be required for almost all arguments.
The only exception is that the first argument should be a positional argument if and only if the following are all true:
* It is required
* Its identity is obvious
* It is consistent (all similar methods have the same first argument)

Unique identifiers are always denoted ``uid`` _unless_ the object being referenced and the object doing the referencing have different types.
If object of type "Foo" has a method that accepts the id of an object of type "Bar", it is denoted ``bar_id``.

Docstrings must follow [Numpy style](https://numpydoc.readthedocs.io/en/latest/format.html) so that Sphinx can parse them to make the docs.

For additional (non-binding) inspiration, check out the [Google Python Style Guide](https://github.com/google/styleguide/blob/gh-pages/pyguide.md).

## PR Submission<a name="pr"></a>
Features should be developed in a branch with a descriptive name and the pull request (PR) submitted into the `main` branch.
Every PR to `main` should increment the version number following [semantic versioning](https://semver.org/).
In order to be merged, a PR must be approved by one authorized user and the build must pass.
A passing build requires the following:
* All tests pass
* The linter finds no violations of PEP8 style
* Every line of code is executed by a test (100% coverage)
* The version, as found in `src/citrine/__version__.py`, has increased

PR descriptions should describe the motivation and context of the code changes in the PR,
both for the reviewer and also for future developers.
If there's a JIRA ticket or Github issue, the PR should be linked to the ticket/issue to provide that context.

Check out the [.travis.yml](.travis.yml) file for the exact testing procedure.

As it can be easy to forget to verify these prior to pushing, it's possible to use [git hooks](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Customizing-Git-Git-Hooks) to enforce compliance during normal workflows.
Consider editing `.git/hooks/pre-commit` or `.git/hooks/pre-push` (or adding them and marking them as executable: `chmod +x <file>`).
For example, you could set your local `.git/hooks/pre-commit` to be
```shell
if [ "`git rev-parse --abbrev-ref HEAD`" == "main" ];
     then echo "On main branch";
     exit 1;
fi                                 &&
scripts/validate-version-bump.sh   &&
flake8 gemd                        &&
pytest --quiet --cov=src --cov-report term-missing:skip-covered   \
  --cov-config=tox.ini --no-cov-on-fail --cov-fail-under=100 -x tests
```
to make sure you're not on the `main` branch, you've incremented the package version, you pass the linter and you have complete, passing tests.

## Documentation<a name="documentation"></a>

The documentation for this project is built using [Sphinx](http://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/) and can be found [here](https://citrineinformatics.github.io/citrine-python/index.html).

### Building Documentation<a name="builddocs"></a>

To build the documentation for this project, make sure you've installed all dependencies (core
and development). Once done:

```
cd docs/
make html
```

You can see the result by opening `docs/_build/html/index.html` in a web browser.

### Autogenerated Docs<a name="autodocs"></a>

Sphinx supports generating documentation from docstrings, which is accomplished automatically
during the build step using sphinxcontrib-apidoc. The output of this process is stored in the gitignore'd
`docs/source/reference` directory. It's not stored in source control because it's generated from
the current state of the docstrings in the source code.

### Custom documentation<a name="customdocs"></a>

One of the outstanding features of sphinx is its support for arbitrarily organized documentation
materials such as tutorials, introductions, and other context-providing content. These items should
be stored in source control under the `docs/source` directory in properly formatted `.rst` files.



## Development Status<a name="status"></a>

Classes and methods may be marked as *alpha* by including `[ALPHA]` at the start of their docstrings.
These methods are intended for development, testing, and experimentation, are not supported, and may change or be removed without notice
